188 
  
The Landscape of Artificial Intelligence Implementation in Ethiopia  
 
Wegene Demisie Jima1*, Tesfaye Addisu Tarekegn1, Taye Girma Debele2 
 
1Artificial intelligence technology transfer division, Ethiopian artificial intelligence institute , Addis Ababa, Ethiopia  
2Research and Development Sector, Ethiopian artificial intelligence institute , Addis Ababa, Ethiopia  
*Corresponding author:  hugnietotal@gmail.com  
Abstract  
This study aims to assess the landscape of Artificial Intelligence (AI) implementation in Ethiopia and provide 
recommendations for Ethiopia’s AI policy and strategy development. This is done by surveying data and computing 
infrastructures, robotic infrastr uctures, organizational level AI policy and strategies, and AI skill development in 
Ethiopia. Studies have been conducted employing semi -structured interviews, a physical review of infrastructures, 
web visits, and literature studies. The data collection in volves 32 government organizations and private companies in 
Ethiopia. The study revealed that the data center service in Ethiopia has many opportunities to grow. There are also 
promising attempts by government organizations in establishing enterprise -based  data centers and implementing 
associated policies within their organizations. The study identified that the country's lack of AI policy and strategy 
affects AI stakeholders to design and create short and long -term action -oriented strategies. Further, the survey revealed 
that the Ethiopian government started encouraging efforts in directing universities for AI skill development, digital 
technology implementation, and infrastructure development. This study implies that focus must be given to data, legal 
fram ework, skill and infrastructure development, research and development investment, inter -organizational 
cooperation, and AI startup support while creating AI policies and strategies.  
Keywords : Artificial Intelligence, infrastructure, Ethiopia, Data center, Policy  
 
1. Introduction   
Artificial intelligence (AI) has evolved as an emerging technology, capable of delivering large incremental 
value to a wide range of sectors ( Ho et al., 2021 ). It has a significant future to stimulate economic growth 
by making processes smarter, faster, and cheaper. AI technology has also the potential to impact individual 
lives, organizations, and society by transforming global economic sectors and creating s ubstantial 
innovation and economic growth ( Berente et al., 2021; Agrawal, 2017) . Potential AI innov ations include 
boosting health and quality of life, enhancing education for remote students, transforming national defense 
and security, improving agricultural productivity, reinventing business innovation and competitiveness, 
effective natural disaster re sponse, rapid materials discovery, monitoring the supply chain, and generating 
resilient cyber security  (Gil and Selman, 2019 ).  
All these innovations require an inclusive national ecosystem suitable for a range of fundamental research 
advances and the adoption of innovation outcomes. This can be facilitated by setting national AI policy and 
strategy which can support data acquisiti ons, AI infrastructure, and skill development, create a regulatory 
framework, and continuous support for research activities and AI startups ( Ho et al., 2021;  Talaviya, 2020; 
Gil and Selman, 2019 ). Tackling appropriate resources needed for AI technology in novation will facilitate 
the sustainable utilization of AI for economic and societal growth. Infrastructure and the talent pool are 
critical issues in the current AI ecosystem. AI infrastructure is the collection of hardware and software 
elements needed to  enable AI applications. It includes computing power, networking, and storage, as well 
as an interface for users to access those resources ( Parsaeefard et al., 2019;  Jordan, 2019 ). According to the 
global AI talent report, AI talents include data engineers , data scientists, machine learning engineers, and 
artificial intelligence engineers ( Haynes and Gbedemah, 2021 ). Globally, the need for AI expertise far 
exceeds the supply, and the gap will only continue to grow unless supported with immediate solutions. 
Available online at https://asric.africa/natural -sciences  
ASRIC Journal on Natural Sciences Vol 3(2) (2023) 1 88-197 
189 
 Finally, there are many concerns related to the security risk of AI systems, data privacy, and ensuring ethical 
uses of AI. Thus, factors will affect AI innovation and deployment by governments, organizations, and 
individuals. The nations which act to over take AI innovation challenges at an early stage and harness its 
opportunity faster will have a chance to lead AI technology revolutions.  
Recently, AI has gained priority in the policy directives of developed nations as well as developing 
countries. Countries are focusing on using AI technologies for development and economic growth, fostering 
research and development, strengthening the AI ec osystem that includes AI infrastructure investment, 
supporting AI startups, and AI skills and knowledge development ( America, 2017 ). All nations around the 
globe started paying due attention to AI and creating institutional competencies. Some countries are  in the 
race for AI technology dominance and working on developing their stances towards AI by capitalizing on 
their comparative strengths and ensuring the risk of AI ( Chatterjee , 2020).  
Similarly, the Ethiopian government recognizes the vast opportunities AI offers to the entire economy and 
considers AI as one of the focus areas in the national digital transformation agendas. Accordingly, the 
Ethiopian government implemented digital trans formation policies and strategies (Kemp, 2023; Digital 
Ethiopia 2025, 2021) , start mobile money 
(https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/wpcontent/uploads/2021/09/GSMA_ME_SSA_2021_English_
Web_Singles.pdf ), established an ICT park that attracts investors that provide data infrastructure services 
and Ethiopian artificial intelligence institutes that lead AI tech communities ( Artificial Intelligence Institute 
Establishment Council of Ministers, Regulation No. 510/2022, 2022; Digital Ethiopia , 2021). However, 
Ethiopia lacks a policy and strategy that guide AI, an enabling data ecosystem that facilitates access to 
intelligent data, sufficient high -quality talent working on cutting -edge AI algorithms, and comput ing 
infrastructure capable to handle AI algorithms. Moreover, the data center market in Ethiopia is at an early 
stage and one of the business areas getting focus recently by the government and private sector.  
In this study, we are going to assess the Ethiopian government’s potential to adopt AI, the challenges the 
government face in the race of AI technology adoption, the digital research infrastructure the nation needs 
to support the development and use of AI by surveying data and computing infrastructure, policy and 
strategies towards AI adoption, and potential trained workforce capable to develop and maintain these 
powerful resources for evaluating the state of AI in Ethiopian.  
2. Methodology  
The data used for this study were collected using semi -structured interviews conducted in person by two 
members of the data collection team with informants selected by the head of the organization followed by 
physical assessments of the AI and robotic infr astructure in Ethiopia between January 1 and 30 2023. 
Interview -guided questionnaires were shared with the selected organization for data collection 15 days 
before semi -structured interviews were conducted to provide time to prepare and collect figurative data by 
data-providing organizations. Data were collected from 10 governmental organizations (ministries/offices/ 
research institutes), 18 universities, and 4 private data infrastructure service providers located in Addis 
Ababa, Oromia, Amhara, Sidama, and  Dire Dawa regions. The collected data is used for assessing 
organizational and national AI policy and strategy, data and computing infrastructure, robotics 
infrastructure, and human force to run AI infrastructure. These organizations were selected based o n a 
preliminary survey of the organization, the time required for data collection, the expenditure involved for 
travel, and the scope of the study. In certain cases where there was inadequate information from the 
interview -guide questionnaire, organization al document review, web visits, and personal communication 
with assigned representatives were conducted to get the required information.  
3. Result and discussion  
3.1. Opportunity for data center industry in Ethiopia  
a. Government Effort on the digital economy  
The digital economy is driving data center industry growth by facilitating digital data consumption. Digital 
infrastructure such as data center service is crucial to foster countries’ economic development and 
190 
 prosperity. Recently, the Ethiopian government working to create policies that support a conducive 
environment for ICT and digital technologies ( Digital Ethiopia 2025, 2021 ). To support this effort the 
country designed and implemented a digital foundation project with a loan received from the World Bank 
for the implementation of digital transformation projects designed by Ethiopia. The project aims to create 
an enabling poli cy and regulatory system, build digital infrastructure, and improve the quality of b roadband 
connections to grow Ethiopia's digital economy. In addition, it focuses on supporting the expansion of 
digital business creation and digital entrepreneurship skills by building the infrastructure for government 
services to be delivered to the user  through electronic means. This project will help to create new 
opportunities for creating creative works, jobs, and resources, and will support the implementation of the 
national strategy to ensure the benefit of the people.  
b. Increasing drivers for the data center market  
With emerging of Ethio Telecom competitors such as Safari com and the falling data cost and affordability, 
more people are gaining access to the Internet and smartphones. Ethio Telecom customer has 68.9 million 
mobile voice users, 33.4 million data and int ernet users, and 584,300 broadband internet users with a total 
of 71.3 million customers as of March 2023 ( https://www.ethiotelecom.et/ ). Ethiopia had more than 44.5 
million smartphone users in 2020. More than 40% of the Ethiopian population is under the age of 15 and 
young consumers looking for a mobile phone which will remain the primary source of growth for the 
foreseeable future. This  has led to an ever -growing amount of digitized data, which drives the adoption of 
data center services in Ethiopia. Ethiopia’s smartphone adoption is forecasted to reach 58 percent in 2025 
from 44 percent in 2020. Safaricom plans to spend $8.5 billion ove r 10 years on network infrastructure and 
services and will be keen to introduce many of its services, including M -Pesa, and data center services to 
Ethiopia 
(https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/wpcontent/uploads/2021/09/GSMA_ME_SSA_2021_English_
Web_Singles.pdf ). In another dimension, Ethiopia is the marketplace for social media platforms like 
Facebook which was the most popular social media platform in Ethiopia, with almost 6.9 million users and 
Messenger followed with nearly 6.5 million accounts. Social media companies store and manage customer 
data from all of the data produced by billions of people on social media ( Kemp, 2023 ). The need for a data 
center will continue as existing social media applications grow and new social media apps are created and 
governm ent needs to store its population data within its territory. Moreover, the beginning of e -commerce 
requires storing data with enhanced data security & privacy and needs data center industry expansion as it 
is the backbone of this vast and ever -expanding tr ading. The data center segment is expected to get revenue 
from E -commerce in Ethiopia as young consumers prefer online spending. Additionally, the mobile app 
market is booming and innovators are engaged in creating new services each day. The app industry h as 
seen immense growth in the past couple of years all over the world and its growth is forecasted to continue 
shortly. The rise in technology -driven start -ups is boosting this market and app market growth is a catalyst 
for the data center market growth.  
c. Growth for data colocation service  
The Ethiopia colocation market has tremendous potential to grow since key customers such as banking, 
insurance, financial services, and media require strict data confidentiality and complete management 
control of their operations. Colocation services lever aging levers like multi -tenancy where multiple 
independent instances of one or multiple applications operate in a shared environment, scalability, and 
reduce capital expenditure amongst other things. In addition, cloud service providers are also generating  
new demand for colocation for third -party facilities to host their infrastructure for providing services to 
customers. Licensing data center services is a cost -efficient and reliable option in comparison to 
establishing private data centers   
3.2. Ethiopian AI Policy and Strategy  
Ethiopia has not yet developed an AI policy and strategy that drive AI adoption and directs national AI -
based research and development, supports AI startups, and guides ethical regulation that comes up with 
new technology utilization ( Kutima et al. , 2023 ).  Ethiopia in developing AI policy and strategy has fallen 
191 
 behind when compared to AI’s usage by start -ups who have so seamlessly blended AI into the services 
provided to customers. Even though policies and strategy are not developed and shared with AI 
stakeholders; most of the universities working on AI has ident ified research area that planned to give 
priority to developing AI solutions. Those organizations set AI research priority areas as natural language 
processing, machine learning, AI, robotics, and data science for providing AI solutions to agriculture, 
education, health, manufacturing, and services sectors. For example, The Ethiopian agriculture sector is 
accompanied by small -scale farmers, who often lack access to the technology and resources needed to 
optimize their crop yields and detect crop diseases. A  research project conducted by Jimma University aim 
in developing an AI -powered drone that could collect data on crop health and yield, the researchers hoped 
to provide farmers with the information they need to make more informed decisions about their crop s. 
Similar projects were conducted by other universities in AI to solve issues of small farmers with AI 
solutions.  
The policy and strategy can help AI stakeholders to design and create action -oriented strategies align with 
national strategies for achieving national AI targets with relevant budgets, timelines, and key performance. 
The policy and strategy also ensure Eth iopian efforts to reorganize resources towards the most pressing 
Ethiopian AI need. The Ethiopian government needs to consider the best approach to AI policy and strategy 
development to create fostering AI ecosystem that contributes to national development  priory agendas. 
Hence, we are recommending six key policy considerations for developing AI policy and strategy in 
Ethiopia which includes skill and capacity development, infrastructure development, investment in research 
and development, access to data, c reating a regulatory framework, and advancing cooperation. The current 
landscape for each of these drivers’ as mentioned by the survey respondents shows crucial features of the 
strategy and needs more work to become successful in harnessing the benefit of AI.  
3.3.  Data and computing infrastructure service providers in Ethiopia   
AI applications have become started growing into the daily lives of Ethiopian citizens in the form of app -
based applications and digital assistants on smartphones. Few IT service providers and software developing 
companies in Ethiopia have begun thinking, talking, and launching AI platforms. AI application developers 
need data center services for data storage and computing services.  There is high interest from the private 
sector in Ethiopia in building data centers and providing services such as colocation  and cloud service. 
Ethio Telecom is one of the leading institutions  in Ethiopia  in providing data center services for customers 
and started colocation data center service in 2021 as shown in Fig.1. Ethio Telecom’s  data center service 
start flourishing and the company is diversifying its data center service as demand for the service grows 
due to trust in connectivity and securities of Ethio Telecom data center service by customers. The company 
data center utilizatio n is 100% and currently, it has more than 90 customers subscribed to its service. The 
major data center service su bscribed by the customer is colocation service and the banking sector is the 
major customer of the organization’s data center service. Ethio Telecom also started providing cloud 
services called telecloud services which include Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS ), Platform as a Service 
(PaaS),  and Software as a Service (SaaS)  for both private and governmental organizations that require high 
data storage and utilization ( https://telecloud.ethiotelecom.et/ ).  Like Ethio Telecom, four private sectors 
have been investing in data center infrastructure in Ethiopia. For instance, Wingu Africa 
(https://www.wingu.africa/our -locations/addis -ababa -ethiopia/ ), RedFox solution group 
(http://redfoxsolutionsgroup.com/ ), and Raxio ( https://www.raxiogroup.com/services/ ) have been invested 
in data center facilities to meet the growing demand for colocation, cloud computing, and other digital 
services in the country. As seen in Fig.1, data center service in Ethiopia is at an early stage of development 
and most private dat a center service is focused on colocation services. All those private data services 
providing companies’ data center is located in the ICT Park in Addis Ababa city and expansion to other 
region is currently limited. Some companies like Wingu Africa and Red fox, plan to expand their data center 
located outside of Addis Ababa city. Additionally, third -party cloud service providers also started growing 
as colocation services start flourishing. Private companies that started providing data center services mainly  
focus on industries such as Enterprise, Financial, Telecoms, and Media sectors as a business target market. 
192 
 But these are just small steps towards achieving the ultimate goal of AI’s contribution to the economic 
growth of the nation. Private data center service expansion will enhance the decentralization of 
organizational IT services by moving data, processing, and resources away from the organization’s local 
data center or corporate hub to the data center service provider’s infrastructure to enable faster processing, 
reduce cost, sustainability, scalability, and security.  
 
Figure1 : Data Center service providers in Ethiopia and Their Services   
Similar to profit -making organizations Ethiopian government also making significant progress in 
expanding its data center infrastructure to support its economic growth and digital transformation. The 
Ethiopian government has launched the construction of a data center in the country, which provides hosting 
services to government agencies and private companies. Uptime Tier III standard data center currently 
located in artificial intelligence institute(AII), minister of Innovation and Technology (MINT) 
(https://www.mint.gov.et ), and Minister of Education (MOE) (  https://ethernet.edu.et/ ) start providing 
service for the customer in need as seen in Fig.2. The data center located in the Ministry of Education 
provides cloud service and high -performance computing (HPC) service to universities, TVET, and other 
accountable institutions to MOE. Similarly, the data center is located in AII and MINT mainly provide data 
center service for government institution and cloud service for limited private organizations (Fig. 2). One 
of the challenges for data center service in Ethiopia is limited skilled h uman resource gaps, especially in 
governmental -based organizations, and the availability of reliable and affordable energy. However, the 
country is investing in improving its energy infrastructure, including the development of renewable energy 
sources like  hydropower, wind, and solar. Another challenge for data center infrastructure in Ethiopia is 
connectivity. The country has been investing in expanding its fiber -optic network to improve connectivity 
and support the growth of data center infrastructure.  

193 
  
 Figure 2: Uptime Tier III Government Data Centers in Ethiopia and Their Services  
3.4. Enterprise -based data center and its attribute in Ethiopia  
It is a type of data center that is built, owned, and operated by companies and optimized for their end -users, 
most of them are on the corporate campus. This kind of data center is owned by most governmental 
organizations and universities. As survey data i ndicated in Fig.3, 16.7% of governmental organizations and 
55.5% of universities do not have data center policies and strategies implemented within their organization.  
Half of the governmental organizations surveyed responded that their data center policy  and strategy is 
underdevelopment while 33.3% of governmental organizations have policy and strategy in place. 
Approximately, half of the university surveyed has also implemented data center policies and strategies 
within their organizations. However, the national ICT strategic plan for higher education and TVET (2021 -
2030) developed by the Minister of Science and Higher Education who is currently the Minister of 
Education was used by most universities (Minister of Science and Higher Education, 2020). Datac enter 
percentage utilization for most organizations as seen in Fig.3 is below 85%. As shown in Fig. 3, the majority 
of enterprise data centers are used air cooling systems as the main source for data center cooling while some 
institutions use water cooling  systems and others use both air and water cooling systems. In other cases, 
83.3% of government organizations and 44.4% of government universities use network -related or tape 
backup systems for their data backup (Fig.3). Around 16.7% of either governmental  organizations or 
universities use edge data center backup systems.  
 
Figure 3: Enterprise -based data center and its attribute in Ethiopia   

194 
 3.5. Robotics infrastructure  
Ethiopia, like many other countries, is currently investing in robotics technology to improve various 
industries such as agriculture, manufacturing, and healthcare. Ethiopia's robotics industry is still in its early 
stages, the country is making significan t investments to develop its robotic infrastructure. The government 
has launched several initiatives to support the development of the country's robotics industry. For example 
in 2021 Ethiopian government establish a research center in 11 universities to p romote research and 
development in which one of the pillars is robotics. The government also create a partnership with 
developmental organizations to establish a robotics hub in Ethiopia to facilitate research, development, and 
commercialization of robotic s technologies.  
The Robotics laboratory focusing on designing, building, and testing robot designs equipped with required 
machines and test bed distribution in Ethiopia is limited.  Most of the robotic laboratories located in 
Ethiopian universities are used for educationa l purposes and are equipped with  analysis, simulation, and 
design tools having software such as CAD/CAM, Solid work, Catia and ANSY, and demonstration robots. 
Robotic research infrastructure for robotics  research, robotics prototyping, manufacturing, and o ptical 
inspection equipped with equipment motion capture system, and a workbench with tools for support and 
maintenance of robots not highly distributed in Ethiopian universities. Among surveyed universities, 44.4% 
of the universities have AI and robotics centers of excellence as seen in Table I. The robotics research 
infrastructure is not sufficient to conduct even simple robotics research and development, and the country 
needs start of art robotic infrastructure that will help researchers to conduct resea rch, tests, and develop 
robots. Moreover, all universities have ICT centers and more than half have STEM centers of excellence. 
ICT centers located at different universities were established with similar structures and goals as directed 
by the minister of education. In other directions, some private institutions also have robotics centers of 
excellence and are working towards training, researching, and robotics developments. For Example, iCog 
Labs is a company engaged in providing research and development s ervices to its customer on artificial 
intelligence, machine learning, robotics, and application software. This company is developing various 
robotics technologies and has worked on projects such as developing robots for educational purposes and 
creating an  AI-powered virtual assistant for customers based in Ethiopia ( https://icog -labs.com/ ).  
Table I: University Contribution towards AI Adoption in Ethiopia   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.6. Human force to run AI infrastructure  
Artificial intelligence is a broad discipline, and it has a diversity of associated specialists for conducting 
research and development and running AI infrastructure. According to the global AI talent report, AI talents 
includes data engineers, data scient ist, machine learning engineer, and artificial intelligence 
engineer( Haynes and Gbedemah, 2021 ). We also follow a similar approach to identify AI human force 
capable to run AI infrastructure. Universities and training centers are working in filling an indu stry need Area of Excellence  Categories  Percentage  
Center of Excellence  AI and Robotics  44.4%  
Information and communication 
technologies (ICT) and Science, 
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics 
(STEM)  100%  
Offer AI -related coarse  Yes  77.7%  
No  22.2%  
Offer AI -related Ph.D. program  Yes 50% 
NO 50% 
Have founded AI -related project  Yes 61.1%  
No  38.9%  
Research priority area  Robotics   44.4%  
Natural Language Processing (NLP)  22.2%  
AI and Machine Learning (ML)  50% 
195 
 and develop professionals working in emerging technology areas. More than 75% of universities in Ethiopia 
recently started providing courses in artificial intelligence and related field as shown in Table I.  
Additionally, 50% of universities surveyed also offer a Ph.D. course in the field related to AI and robotics. 
Moreover, around 60 % of universities surveyed have funding for AI -related projects. This indicates 
governmental organizations as well as private companies interested in AI technologies. The res earch 
priorities of most of the universities are artificial intelligence and machine learning, followed by robotics 
research and development.  
3.7. Challenges for artificial intelligence adoption in Ethiopia  
a. Access to data  
AI applications require a large set of data to train machine models for better performance. AI researchers 
and developers’ demand for access to data has exponentially grown in the world. This has largely been led 
by the assumption that AI model training ne eds access to data facilitates to spur innovation, improved 
service delivery, and better economic opportunities for citizens. Ethiopian companies’ digital data capturing 
and sharing experience is limited and major data players are reluctant to share their company data. As a 
result, important industry -specific data necessary for building AI solutions and utilize for customized 
platforms have been limited.  
b. Regulatory framework  
Ethiopia lacks AI policies and strategies that promote AI development, and create enabling ecosystem for 
AI investment, utilization, and capacity and skill development. The absence of a national AI regulatory 
framework created a risk of data privacy, and f ear of investments in AI infrastructure, research and 
development, and training. This slows the development and growth of AI in the country. Hence, the 
government needs to act rapidly to create enabling ecosystem for AI development and utilization by 
devel oping AI policy and sharing with its stakeholders, regulatory laws and means to mitigate AI risks.  
c. Infrastructure  
AI infrastructure development by the government, as well as private institutions, is at an early stage in 
Ethiopia and appropriate computing infrastructure is rarely available throughout the country. AI application 
Training and interface require high compu ting and connectivity for the appropriate deployment of AI -based 
services. Only a few cloud service providers provide cloud service and most of them are under development. 
The lack of availability of AI infrastructure is posing problems for start -ups to us e AI. Low availability of 
proper infrastructure and its cost push startups to look for an alternative source outside that country based 
on open -source services.  
d. AI talent  
It is known that only a meager percentage of AI professionals in Ethiopia could work on AI technology. 
The insufficient availability of talent in the field of AI has created impediments to AI adoption. There is a 
dearth of Ph.D. scholars in this domain.  
e. AI Research and Development  
The lack of government and private institutions’ investment in AI research and development limits the 
opportunities to design AI solutions that meet the most pressing Ethiopian needs. The government must 
provide funding for research and development in prov iding AI solutions in priority government sectors.  
f. Cooperation  
The involvement of the international organization in funding AI research in Ethiopia is limited compared 
to neighboring countries such as Kenya. Regional and international cooperation is also needed for data -
sharing, cofounding AI solutions, and mobility o f AI talents useful for local AI developers in advancing in 
AI research for developmental priorities.  
3.8. AI Implications in Ethiopia and Action Forward   
Ethiopia working to deploy AI solutions on a small scale, unlike other African countries that attracted global 
technology giants such as Google’s AI research lab in Accra, Ghana, and IBM’s AI -oriented research labs 
196 
 in Kenya and South Africa ( Global Information Society Watch, 2019 ). However, global companies such as 
Excellent Digital Solution have centers in Ethiopia and offer Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
solutions to customers around the globe ( https://excellerentsolutions.com/ ). Similarly, iCog Labs Software 
Consultancy Company based in Addis Ababa provided research and development services to its customers 
on artificial intelligence, machine learning, robotics, and application software in collaboration with 
international AI re search groups ( https://icog -labs.com/ ). Ethio Robo Robotics 
(https://ethioroborobotics.com ) company partnering with VEX Robotics ( https://www.vexrobotics.com ), a 
US-based company working to transform access to robotics training by providing mentor -based training to 
children to promote the early adoption of AI technologies. Guzo Technologies, Lersha, EthioCloud, and 
other companies are also working on AI relate d-software and product development to provide AI solutions 
to customers in Ethiopia to mention a few. Those are attempts by private sector investments in AI -based 
solutions for early AI technology adoptions in Ethiopia. In terms of government readiness, th e state of AI 
in Ethiopia is accompanied by various challenges and opportunities ( Adams, 2022 ). The government has 
given attention to technology and perceived it as one of the technologies that have the potential for 
economic and social development. Accord ingly, the government has invested in establishing ICT Park that 
attracts investors working in IT and IT -related services, creates Ethiopian artificial intelligence institutes 
that lead AI tech communities, built a government data center, and directed univ ersities to train more AI 
task forces. However, the government lacks behind in publishing AI policies and strategies, implementing 
legal frameworks concerning data privacy and protection, assessing the ethical risks of AI solutions on 
societies, and other related issues. The adoption of AI technology within the country is also challenged by 
factors such as lack of access to data, absence of regulatory framework, lack of computing and data 
infrastructure, limited AI talent, insignificant R& D investment, and  cooperation among others. AI 
applications require a large set of data to train machine models for better performance. AI researchers and 
developers’ demand for access to data has exponentially grown in the world. This has largely been led by 
the assumptio n that AI model training needs access to data facilitates to spur innovation, improved service 
delivery, and better economic opportunities for citizens. Ethiopian companies’ digital data capturing and 
sharing experience is limited and major data players ar e reluctant to share their company data. As a result, 
important industry -specific data necessary for building AI solutions and utilize for customized platforms 
have been limited. Ethiopia also lacks AI regulatory framework that promotes AI development and 
deployments. The absence of a national AI regulatory framework created a risk of data privacy, and fear of 
investments in AI infrastructure, research and development, and training. AI infrastructure development by 
the government, as well as private institu tions, is at an early stage in Ethiopia and appropriate computing 
infrastructure is rarely available throughout the country. AI application Training and interface require high 
computing and connectivity for the appropriate deployment of AI -based services. Only a few cloud service 
providers provide cloud service and most of them are under development. The lack of availability of AI 
infrastructure is posing problems for start -ups to use AI. Low availability of proper infrastructure and its 
cost push startups to look for an alternative source outside that country based on open -source services. The 
insufficient availability of talent in the field of AI accompanied by the lack of government and private 
institutions’ investment in AI research and development has c reated impediments to AI adoption. The 
government must provide funding for research and development in providing AI solutions in priority 
government sectors. Finally, regional and international cooperation is also needed for data -sharing, 
cofounding AI sol utions, and mobility of AI talents useful for local AI developers in advancing AI 
development and deployments.  
4. Conclusion  
An organizational survey was conducted to assess the state of the AI ecosystem in Ethiopia by mapping 
Ethiopian AI infrastructure and government readiness to create sustainable ecosystems to intake and adopt 
AI in Ethiopia.  The survey data was collected f rom 28 governmental organizations including ministries, 
research institutions, offices, and universities, and 4 private data infrastructure service providers in Ethiopia. 
The collected data were analyzed by categorizing collected data into data center infr astructure and services, 
robotics infrastructure, and human force to run AI infrastructure. Additional government attempts in 
197 
 developing Ethiopian AI policy and strategy and challenges Ethiopia faced for AI adoptions were analyzed 
based on data from surveyed organizations. The Ethiopian government is making significant progress in 
expanding its data center infrastructure to suppo rt its economic growth and digital transformation.  The data 
center industry in Ethiopia has many driving opportunities such as government efforts on the digital 
economy, growth of data colocation service, and increasing drivers for the data center market that include 
increasing mobile penetrations and usage of the internet, growth of social media usage, the beginning of e -
commerce, emerging of IT and IT -enabled service, a rise of app eco -system and emerging technologies. 
There is high interest from the pri vate sector in Ethiopia in building data centers and providing services 
such as colocation and cloud service. Currently, there are around 8 companies in Ethiopia that provide data 
center services, and most of them provide data colocation services as the ma in preferable data center 
services. Ethio Telecom is a company that has a large number of subscribers compared to other data center 
service providers. Most of the organizations surveyed have an enterprise data center. Ethiopia lacks state 
of art robotic in frastructure capable of research and development, prototyping, and manufacturing of robots. 
Similarly, Ethiopia has a shortage of AI talents. However, most of the universities in Ethiopia started 
providing training in AI and started Ph.D. programs in AI -related fields that support AI adoption shortly.   
5. Reference   
Adams, R., 2022. AI in Africa: key concerns and policy considerations for the future of the continent.  
Agrawal, A., Gans, J. and Goldfarb, A., 2017. What to expect from artificial intelligence.  
America, N., 2017. A Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan, China, July, New America.  
Artificial Intelligence Institute Establishment Council of Ministers, Regulation No. 510/2022, Federal Negarit 
Gazette , 2022, pages 14216 -14222  
Berente, N., Gu, B., Recker, J. and Santhanam, R., 2021. Managing artificial intelligence, MIS Quarterly , 45(3).  DOI: 
10.25300/MISQ/2021/16274  
Chatterjee, S., 2020. AI strategy of India: policy framework, adoption challenges and actions for government, 
Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy , 14(5), pp.757 -775.  https://doi.org/10.1108/TG -
05-2019 -0031  
Crainic, A., 2021. Research into the use of AI in business in the Netherlands and how to drive adoption.  
Digital Ethiopia 2025, 2021. A digital strategy for Ethiopia’s inclusive prosperity, Federal democratic republic of 
Ethiopia”, available at: https://mint.gov.et/wp -content/uploads/2021/05/Digital -Ethiopia -2025 -Strategy -
english. -.pdf  
Gil, Y. and Selman, B., 2019. A 20 -year community roadmap for artificial intelligence research in the US. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1908.02624.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1908.02624  
Global Information Society Watch, 2019. Artificial intelligence: Human rights, social justice and development.  
Haynes, A. and Gbedemah, L., 2021. The Global AI Index, Methodology”, Tortoise Media 2021  
Ho, D.E., King, J., Wald, R.C. and Wald, C., 2021. Building a national AI research resource: a blueprint for the 
national research cloud. Stanford Institute for Human -Centered Artificial Intelligence.  
Jordan, M.I., 2019. Artificial intelligence —the revolution hasn’t happened yet, Harvard Data Science Review , 1(1), 
pp.1-9. 
Kemp, S., 2023. Digital 2023: Ethiopia, Datareportal, available at: https://datareportal.com/reports/digital -2023 -
ethiopia  
Klauke, J., Heinz, S.,A Maturity Model for Artificial Intelligence” STATWORX AI -Whitepaper  
Kutima,V., Ogonjo,F., Karanja, N., Abiero,D., Orero,L.O., Kaaniru,J., 2023. The State of AI in Africa Report 2023, 
Strathmore University, Centre for Intellectual Property and Information Technology Law (CIPIT)  
Minister of Science and Higher Education, 2020. National ICT Strategic Plan for Higher Education and TVET (2021 -
2030), Ethiopia  
Parsaeefard, S., Tabrizian, I. and Leon -Garcia, A., 2019. Artificial intelligence as a service (AI -aaS) on software -
defined Infrastructure, In  2019 IEEE Conference on Standards for Communications and Networking 
(CSCN)  (pp. 1 -7). DOI: 10.1109/CSCN.2019.8931372  
Talaviya, T., Shah, D., Patel, N., Yagnik, H. and Shah, M., 2020. Implementation of artificial intelligence in 
agriculture for optimization of irrigation and application of pesticides and herbicides,  Artificial Intelligence 
in Agriculture , 4, pp.58 -73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.04.002  
 